doc/index.rst, before:

Cadishi documentation
=====================

Introduction
------------

The Cadishi package is designed to perform fast computations of histograms of
the (Euclidean) distances between objects. For example, these objects may be
atoms from molecular dynamics (MD) simulation datasets, or stars or galaxies
from astrophysical datasets. While Cadishi is written mostly in Python, it is
built upon high-performance kernels written in C++ and CUDA to exploit the CPU
and GPU resources of a compute node as best as possible.

In the field of MD simulations, Cadishi is most useful in conjunction with the
Capriqorn package. The name Cadishi is simply an acronym derived from (or, more
precisely, the syllabic abbreviation of) *calculation of distance histograms*.


Requirements
------------

Cadishi requires a Python 2.7 installation including the NumPy, SciPy, Cython,
h5py, and PyYAML modules. We recommend to use the Anaconda Python Distribution
which provides all the necessary modules out of the box. Cadishi was mostly
developed using Anaconda Python 2, versions 4.0.0 and newer. Moreover, to
compile the high-performance kernels, recent GCC and CUDA (optional)
installations are required. GCC 4.9 and GCC 5.4, and CUDA 7.5 and 8.0 were used
successfully. Note that Python 3 is currently not supported.


Features
--------

Cadishi features a two-level parallelization. On the top level, Cadishi
parallelizes over frames (i.e. snapshots of the ensemble of objects at certain
points in time) using the Python multiprocessing module. A single frame is
processed by a single worker process running a CPU or GPU kernel. Multiple
worker processes may run simultaneously on a shared-memory multi-core machine.
On the frame level, OpenMP threads are used by the CPU kernel, and CUDA threads
are used by the GPU kernel. Hence, it is possible to fully exploit the
resources of a shared-memory machine. E.g., on a dual-socket server with two
GPUs, Cadishi would use two CPU worker processes (one per multi-core chip) and
two GPU worker processes (one per GPU card).

Optionally, Cadishi supports orthorhombic periodic boxes, applying the minimum
image convention to the distances internally. Support for triclinic boxes is
implemented following the equations given by Tuckerman (M. E. Tuckerman.
Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Molecular Simulation. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, UK, 2010.).  Note that we consider support for triclinic boxes as highly
experimental. Check your results carefully for possible inconsistencies.

Computations can be performed in single (default) or double precision.
Optionally, the distances can be checked if they fit into the desired histogram
width. Given the combinatorial space resulting from these possibilities,
templated C++ code is used to generate machine code with a minimum amount of
branches at runtime. Recent compilers are known to generate well-vectorized
machine code from the distance calculation for the CPU. The GPU kernel benefits
strongly from the fast shared-memory atomic operations introduced with the
MAXWELL generation of NVIDIA GPUs.


Input data, distance histogram computation, output data
-------------------------------------------------------

**Cadishi reads input data from an HDF5 file** that is specified in the
``histograms.yaml`` parameter file.  A typical file location is
``./preprocessor_output/trajectory.h5`` when Cadishi is used in concert with
the Capriqorn package from the same authors. In any case the HDF5 file must have
a certain internal structure as shown in the following example::

    /0/coordinates/species_0
                   species_1
                   species_2
                   ...
    /1/coordinates/species_0
                   species_1
                   species_2
                   ...
    ...

Frames are numbered starting with 0. The number is used as the label for the
uppermost HDF5 group. For each frame the particle coordinates are stored in the
sub-group 'coordinates'. Coordinate sets are double precision HDF5 datasets of
size (n_i, 3) where n_i is the number of particles of species i. The coordinate
datasets use the name of the species as the label which e.g. can be the name of
the chemical element in the context of MD data.

To demonstrate how to feed data into Cadishi there is an **example code**
available at ``doc/input_example.py``. Adapt that code to easily implement a
reader for arbitrary custom data.

For each frame read from the HDF5 file **Cadishi computes the distance histograms**
between the particles for all combinations of species. The top-level parallelization
of Cadishi is able to compute multiple frames simultaneously on all GPUs and CPUs
available on a node. Within a frame the computation is highly parallelized using
threads.

Finally, **Cadishi writes the histograms into HDF5 files** according to the
following scheme::

    /0/histograms/species_0,species_0
                  species_0,species_1
                  species_0,species_2
                  species_1,species_1
                  species_1,species_2
                  species_2,species_2
                  ...
    ...

The HDF5 histogram datasets are single-column vectors of 64 bit floats. The
numerical datatype was chosen to make averaging easier and more consistent.

To get an idea about all the options available please have a look at the example
parameter file that comes with Cadishi.  It can be generated using the command
``cadishi example [--expert]``.

To **make life with HDF5 files easier** we recommend to use a graphical HDF5
viewer such as HDFView.  Note, however, that HDFView does not support the LZF
compression that comes with the Python HDF5 module "H5py" and is used by Cadishi
by default (LZF can be disabled via the parameter file)). Moreover, Cadishi
comes with the HDF5 unpack (``cadishi unpack``) and the HDF5 merge tool
(``cadishi merge``). The latter tool can also be used to decompress single HDF5
files quickly before viewing them with HDFView.


Parameters
----------

Cadishi is highly configurable via its YAML parameter file (create a sample file
using ``cadishi example [--expert]``). Below we pick the most important
parameters and provide some background explanation.

- ``histogram:dr``: Defines the histogram bin width. The total number of bins is determined in conjunction with the following parameter.
- ``histogram:r_max``: Defines the histogram cutoff radius. Make sure that your input data is compatible with the cutoff radius, i.e. the maximum distance between all points must be smaller. In this context, the following settings are important.
- ``cpu:check_input`` and ``gpu:check_input``: Checks at runtime if any distance computed is equal or smaller than the cutoff radius. If this is the case, an exception is raised that causes Cadishi to exit. If these parameters are set to false, no checks are performed and outliers may write into non-allocated memory. In order to achieve the highest possible performance, make absolutely sure that your data fits into r_max and disable the checks.
- ``input:periodic_box``: The default value is null, causing Cadishi to automatically look for the presence of box information in the input data. A box can as well be specified explicitly, or disabled by setting the value to an empty list []. Note that we consider the triclinic box implementation currently as experimental.

To achieve optimum **performance**, the number of workers and threads must be
tuned to your system. For large frames (>O(100000) particles) it is reasonable
to use few workers and a large number of threads per worker, e.g. if you have a
16 core CPU you could run a single cpu worker process with 14 threads, while
keeping the 2 more cores busy with Cadishi's reader and writer processes (you
always have these two processes). For small frames, use more workers and fewer
(down to one) threads. Running some experiments is useful to gain experience
with specific datasets. Note that Cadishi supports NUMA awareness, i.e.
processes can be pinned to CPUs. Calculations on large frames *greatly* benefit
from the GPU kernels. Enable one worker per GPU. We have seen a binning rate of
up to 160 billion particle-pairs per second on a single Pascal GPU.


Installation
------------

The package comes with a standard Python setup.py file.  It is installed e.g. as
follows into the user's homedirectory::

   python setup.py install --user

In this case, setup.py copies the Cadishi files into the directory ``~/.local``.
Make sure that your ``PATH`` environment variable includes the directory
``~/.local/bin``.  To enable a CUDA build the ``nvcc`` compiler wrapper must be
found via the ``PATH`` environment variable.  Influential boolean environment variables
are ``CAD_DEBUG``, ``CAD_OPENMP``, ``CAD_CUDA``, and ``CAD_SAFE_CUDA_FLAGS``; if
set they override the keys listed in the options section of the file ``setup.cfg``.


Usage
-----

The Cadishi package provides a single main executable ``cadishi`` which supports
commands and options (similar to the well-known concept used by ``git``).

To get a quick overview on the options of Cadishi issue the following command::

   cadishi --help

To get started a parameter file controlling the distance histogram calculation
is required. A basic example is included with the package and can be created as
follows::

   cadishi example [--expert]

By default, the parameter file's name is ``histograms.yaml``. Edit the parameter
file to your needs.  In particular, the compute kernels *pydh* (CPU) and *cudh*
(GPU) can be configured.  In the example parameter file, the input configuration
points to the default test case included with the Cadishi package. Adapt the
input configuration to your actual data. An example code on how to import data
into Cadishi is given in ``doc/input_example.py``. As a second step the distance
histogram calculation is run as follows::

   cadishi histo


Source documentation
--------------------

The documentation linked below is generated automatically from the docstrings
present in the Cadishi source code.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   modules.rst

   kernel.rst

   executables.rst


License and Citation
--------------------

Cadishi is released under the permissive MIT license.  See the file
`LICENSE.txt` for details.

Copyright 2015-2017  Klaus Reuter (MPCDF), Juergen Koefinger (MPIBP)

In case you're using Cadishi for your own academic or non-academic research, **we
kindly request that you cite Cadishi in your publications and presentations**. We
suggest the following citations as appropriate:

TODO: Add proper paper reference once it is publicly available. Please use the
following reference meanwhile:
"K. Reuter, J. Koefinger: Cadishi, https://github.com/bio-phys/cadishi, 2017."


Indices and tables
------------------

* :ref:`genindex`
* :ref:`modindex`
* :ref:`search`

Commit message:

added and linked example program from documentation

doc/index.rst, after:

Cadishi documentation
=====================

Introduction
------------

The Cadishi package is designed to perform fast computations of histograms of
the (Euclidean) distances between objects. For example, these objects may be
atoms from molecular dynamics (MD) simulation datasets, or stars or galaxies
from astrophysical datasets. While Cadishi is written mostly in Python, it is
built upon high-performance kernels written in C++ and CUDA to exploit the CPU
and GPU resources of a compute node as best as possible.

In the field of MD simulations, Cadishi is most useful in conjunction with the
Capriqorn package. The name Cadishi is simply an acronym derived from (or, more
precisely, the syllabic abbreviation of) *calculation of distance histograms*.


Requirements
------------

Cadishi requires a Python 2.7 installation including the NumPy, SciPy, Cython,
h5py, and PyYAML modules. We recommend to use the Anaconda Python Distribution
which provides all the necessary modules out of the box. Cadishi was mostly
developed using Anaconda Python 2, versions 4.0.0 and newer. Moreover, to
compile the high-performance kernels, recent GCC and CUDA (optional)
installations are required. GCC 4.9 and GCC 5.4, and CUDA 7.5 and 8.0 were used
successfully. Note that Python 3 is currently not supported.


Features
--------

Cadishi features a two-level parallelization. On the top level, Cadishi
parallelizes over frames (i.e. snapshots of the ensemble of objects at certain
points in time) using the Python multiprocessing module. A single frame is
processed by a single worker process running a CPU or GPU kernel. Multiple
worker processes may run simultaneously on a shared-memory multi-core machine.
On the frame level, OpenMP threads are used by the CPU kernel, and CUDA threads
are used by the GPU kernel. Hence, it is possible to fully exploit the
resources of a shared-memory machine. E.g., on a dual-socket server with two
GPUs, Cadishi would use two CPU worker processes (one per multi-core chip) and
two GPU worker processes (one per GPU card).

Optionally, Cadishi supports orthorhombic periodic boxes, applying the minimum
image convention to the distances internally. Support for triclinic boxes is
implemented following the equations given by Tuckerman (M. E. Tuckerman.
Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Molecular Simulation. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, UK, 2010.).  Note that we consider support for triclinic boxes as highly
experimental. Check your results carefully for possible inconsistencies.

Computations can be performed in single (default) or double precision.
Optionally, the distances can be checked if they fit into the desired histogram
width. Given the combinatorial space resulting from these possibilities,
templated C++ code is used to generate machine code with a minimum amount of
branches at runtime. Recent compilers are known to generate well-vectorized
machine code from the distance calculation for the CPU. The GPU kernel benefits
strongly from the fast shared-memory atomic operations introduced with the
MAXWELL generation of NVIDIA GPUs.


Input data, distance histogram computation, output data
-------------------------------------------------------

**Cadishi reads input data from an HDF5 file** that is specified in the
``histograms.yaml`` parameter file.  A typical file location is
``./preprocessor_output/trajectory.h5`` when Cadishi is used in concert with
the Capriqorn package from the same authors. In any case the HDF5 file must have
a certain internal structure as shown in the following example::

    /0/coordinates/species_0
                   species_1
                   species_2
                   ...
    /1/coordinates/species_0
                   species_1
                   species_2
                   ...
    ...

Frames are numbered starting with 0. The number is used as the label for the
uppermost HDF5 group. For each frame the particle coordinates are stored in the
sub-group 'coordinates'. Coordinate sets are double precision HDF5 datasets of
size (n_i, 3) where n_i is the number of particles of species i. The coordinate
datasets use the name of the species as the label which e.g. can be the name of
the chemical element in the context of MD data.

To demonstrate how to feed data into Cadishi there is an **example code**
available at
:download:`doc/scripts/input_example.py <./scripts/input_example.py>`.
Adapt that code to easily implement a reader for arbitrary custom data.

For each frame read from the HDF5 file **Cadishi computes the distance histograms**
between the particles for all combinations of species. The top-level parallelization
of Cadishi is able to compute multiple frames simultaneously on all GPUs and CPUs
available on a node. Within a frame the computation is highly parallelized using
threads.

Finally, **Cadishi writes the histograms into HDF5 files** according to the
following scheme::

    /0/histograms/species_0,species_0
                  species_0,species_1
                  species_0,species_2
                  species_1,species_1
                  species_1,species_2
                  species_2,species_2
                  ...
    ...

The HDF5 histogram datasets are single-column vectors of 64 bit floats. The
numerical datatype was chosen to make averaging easier and more consistent.

To get an idea about all the options available please have a look at the example
parameter file that comes with Cadishi.  It can be generated using the command
``cadishi example [--expert]``.

To **make life with HDF5 files easier** we recommend to use a graphical HDF5
viewer such as HDFView.  Note, however, that HDFView does not support the LZF
compression that comes with the Python HDF5 module "H5py" and is used by Cadishi
by default (LZF can be disabled via the parameter file)).

Moreover, to demonstrate how to access the HDF5 data written by Cadishi from
Python we provide the example program
:download:`doc/scripts/plot_hdf5_data.py <./scripts/plot_hdf5_data.py>`.
It opens the HDF5 container, reads the last frame and plots a histogram using
matplotlib. As an input file, the Cadishi output from the test case can be taken.

Finally, Cadishi comes with a HDF5 unpack tool (``cadishi unpack``) and a HDF5
merge tool (``cadishi merge``). The latter tool can also be used to decompress
single HDF5 files quickly before viewing them with HDFView.


Parameters
----------

Cadishi is highly configurable via its YAML parameter file (create a sample file
using ``cadishi example [--expert]``). Below we pick the most important
parameters and provide some background explanation.

- ``histogram:dr``: Defines the histogram bin width. The total number of bins is determined in conjunction with the following parameter.
- ``histogram:r_max``: Defines the histogram cutoff radius. Make sure that your input data is compatible with the cutoff radius, i.e. the maximum distance between all points must be smaller. In this context, the following settings are important.
- ``cpu:check_input`` and ``gpu:check_input``: Checks at runtime if any distance computed is equal or smaller than the cutoff radius. If this is the case, an exception is raised that causes Cadishi to exit. If these parameters are set to false, no checks are performed and outliers may write into non-allocated memory. In order to achieve the highest possible performance, make absolutely sure that your data fits into r_max and disable the checks.
- ``input:periodic_box``: The default value is null, causing Cadishi to automatically look for the presence of box information in the input data. A box can as well be specified explicitly, or disabled by setting the value to an empty list []. Note that we consider the triclinic box implementation currently as experimental.

To achieve optimum **performance**, the number of workers and threads must be
tuned to your system. For large frames (>O(100000) particles) it is reasonable
to use few workers and a large number of threads per worker, e.g. if you have a
16 core CPU you could run a single cpu worker process with 14 threads, while
keeping the 2 more cores busy with Cadishi's reader and writer processes (you
always have these two processes). For small frames, use more workers and fewer
(down to one) threads. Running some experiments is useful to gain experience
with specific datasets. Note that Cadishi supports NUMA awareness, i.e.
processes can be pinned to CPUs. Calculations on large frames *greatly* benefit
from the GPU kernels. Enable one worker per GPU. We have seen a binning rate of
up to 160 billion particle-pairs per second on a single Pascal GPU.


Installation
------------

The package comes with a standard Python setup.py file.  It is installed e.g. as
follows into the user's homedirectory::

   python setup.py install --user

In this case, setup.py copies the Cadishi files into the directory ``~/.local``.
Make sure that your ``PATH`` environment variable includes the directory
``~/.local/bin``.  To enable a CUDA build the ``nvcc`` compiler wrapper must be
found via the ``PATH`` environment variable.  Influential boolean environment variables
are ``CAD_DEBUG``, ``CAD_OPENMP``, ``CAD_CUDA``, and ``CAD_SAFE_CUDA_FLAGS``; if
set they override the keys listed in the options section of the file ``setup.cfg``.


Usage
-----

The Cadishi package provides a single main executable ``cadishi`` which supports
commands and options (similar to the well-known concept used by ``git``).

To get a quick overview on the options of Cadishi issue the following command::

   cadishi --help

To get started a parameter file controlling the distance histogram calculation
is required. A basic example is included with the package and can be created as
follows::

   cadishi example [--expert]

By default, the parameter file's name is ``histograms.yaml``. Edit the parameter
file to your needs.  In particular, the compute kernels *pydh* (CPU) and *cudh*
(GPU) can be configured.  In the example parameter file, the input configuration
points to the default test case included with the Cadishi package. Adapt the
input configuration to your actual data. An example code on how to import data
into Cadishi is available at
:download:`doc/scripts/input_example.py <./scripts/input_example.py>`.
As a second step the distance histogram calculation is run as follows::

   cadishi histo


Source documentation
--------------------

The documentation linked below is generated automatically from the docstrings
present in the Cadishi source code.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   modules.rst

   kernel.rst

   executables.rst


License and Citation
--------------------

Cadishi is released under the permissive MIT license.  See the file
`LICENSE.txt` for details.

Copyright 2015-2017  Klaus Reuter (MPCDF), Juergen Koefinger (MPIBP)

In case you're using Cadishi for your own academic or non-academic research, **we
kindly request that you cite Cadishi in your publications and presentations**. We
suggest the following citations as appropriate:

TODO: Add proper paper reference once it is publicly available. Please use the
following reference meanwhile:
"K. Reuter, J. Koefinger: Cadishi, https://github.com/bio-phys/cadishi, 2017."


Indices and tables
------------------

* :ref:`genindex`
* :ref:`modindex`
* :ref:`search`
